Enhancement:Updated Functional Testing Section to Playwright (#766)
liatrio/devops-bootcamp: docs/6-software-development-practices/6.5.2-functional-testing.md

## Example

One popular tool for functional testing of websites and web applications is Playwright. Playwright is an open-source framework for browser automation. It allows you to write tests that programmatically interact with a website, checking functionality. This is extremely helpful in automating tests, as the same tests can be performed across all major browsers.

An example use case of Playwright is testing a web application’s login form. While a unit test might check that the email field only accepts valid email addresses, a functional test using Playwright could verify that logging in with a valid email and password successfully logs the user in.

## Exercise 1:

> We'll use Playwright and pytest to run functional tests. This approach is popular for its modern features, speed, and reliability. We'll manage our project's dependencies with uv.We're going to take this opportunity to introduce you to `uv` [\(docs\)](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a python tool somewhat similar to `npm` in the JavaScript ecosystem.

Reviewer: Looks like there's a space missing between "uv." and "We're going to take..."

> We'll use Playwright and pytest to run functional tests. This approach is popular for its modern features, speed, and reliability. We'll manage our project's dependencies with uv.We're going to take this opportunity to introduce you to `uv` [\(docs\)](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a python tool somewhat similar to `npm` in the JavaScript ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll use Playwright and pytest to run functional tests. This approach is popular for its modern features, speed, and reliability. We'll manage our project's dependencies with `uv`. We're going to take this opportunity to introduce you to `uv` [\(docs\)](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a python tool somewhat similar to `npm` in the JavaScript ecosystem.
```

> We'll use Playwright and pytest to run functional tests. This approach is popular for its modern features, speed, and reliability. We'll manage our project's dependencies with uv.We're going to take this opportunity to introduce you to `uv` [\(docs\)](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a python tool somewhat similar to `npm` in the JavaScript ecosystem.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We'll use Playwright and pytest to run functional tests. This approach is popular for its modern features, speed, and reliability. We'll also take this opportunity to introduce you to `uv` [\(docs\)](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/), a python tool for managing dependencies, somewhat similar to `npm` in the JavaScript ecosystem.
```

`uv` allows you to manage a python projects dependencies in a declarative manner (like `pip`), set up virtual python environments, declare required python versions, and more.

1. Set up Your Project
   First, install uv (a fast Python package manager).

   `brew install uv`

>    Next, create a project directory and initialize a virtual environment with uv.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Next, create a project directory and initialize a virtual environment with `uv`.
```

   `mkdir playwright-tests`

   `cd playwright-tests`

   `uv init`

2. Add Dependencies
    Use uv to add Playwright and its pytest plugin to your project.
   `uv add playwright pytest-playwright`

3. Install Browser Drivers
   Playwright requires its own browser binaries. Install them by running:
   `uv run playwright install`

4. Use the starter code provided to test
    * The link in the bottom right corner of the homepage takes you to [the bootcamp introduction](https://devops-bootcamp.liatr.io/#/1-introduction/1.0-overview)
    * The sidebar toggle button properly hides the sidebar

> ```python
> import re
> from playwright.sync_api import Page, expect
> 
> BASE_URL = "https://devops-bootcamp.liatr.io"
> 
> def test_bootcamp_link(page: Page):
>     """Tests that the 'Introduction to DevOps' link navigates correctly."""
>     # go to the bootcamp site
>     page.goto(BASE_URL)
> 
>     # check we get expected page title
>     expect(page).to_have_title(re.compile("Welcome"))
> 
>     # find the link to Introduction to DevOps section
>     page.get_by_role("link", name=re.compile("Introduction to DevOps")).first.click()
> 
>     # check that we get the expected url
>     expect(page).to_have_url(re.compile(".*/1-introduction/.*"))
> 
> def test_bootcamp_sidebar(page: Page):
>     """Tests that the sidebar toggle button works correctly."""
>     # go to the bootcamp site
>     page.goto(BASE_URL)
> 
>     # check that the sidebar is shown (HINT: check html body attributes)
>     body = page.locator("body")
>     expect(body).not_to_have_attribute("class", re.compile("close"))
> 
>     # find the sidebar toggle and toggle it
>     toggle_button = page.locator(".sidebar-toggle").first
>     toggle_button.click()
> 
>     # after toggling sidebar, check that it is closed
>     expect(body).to_have_attribute("class", re.compile("close"))
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```python
import re
from playwright.sync_api import Page, expect

BASE_URL = "https://devops-bootcamp.liatr.io"

def test_bootcamp_link(page: Page):
    """Tests that the 'Introduction to DevOps' link navigates correctly."""
    # go to the bootcamp site
    page.goto(BASE_URL)

    # check we get expected page title
    expect(page).to_have_title(re.compile("Welcome"))

    # IMPLEMENT find the link to Introduction to DevOps section

    # IMPLEMENT check that we get the expected url

```

5. With just the starter code verify you can run the tests

6. Now we want to add another tests that verifies that the sidebar toggle works to toggle the visibility of the sidebar. Make sure you are writing good assertions to actually verify the behavior you are testing.

>? Playwright runs in headless mode by default. This is great for performance but can be challenging when developing. Explore the options `--headed` and `--slowmo`

**Challenge:** Modify your tests so that on any failure you capture a screenshot
```

Good changes I just want this to have a little more challenging of an exercise

> ```python
> import re
> from playwright.sync_api import Page, expect
> 
> BASE_URL = "https://devops-bootcamp.liatr.io"
> 
> def test_bootcamp_link(page: Page):
>     """Tests that the 'Introduction to DevOps' link navigates correctly."""
>     # go to the bootcamp site
>     page.goto(BASE_URL)
> 
>     # check we get expected page title
>     expect(page).to_have_title(re.compile("Welcome"))
> 
>     # find the link to Introduction to DevOps section
>     page.get_by_role("link", name=re.compile("Introduction to DevOps")).first.click()
> 
>     # check that we get the expected url
>     expect(page).to_have_url(re.compile(".*/1-introduction/.*"))
> 
> def test_bootcamp_sidebar(page: Page):
>     """Tests that the sidebar toggle button works correctly."""
>     # go to the bootcamp site
>     page.goto(BASE_URL)
> 
>     # check that the sidebar is shown (HINT: check html body attributes)
>     body = page.locator("body")
>     expect(body).not_to_have_attribute("class", re.compile("close"))
> 
>     # find the sidebar toggle and toggle it
>     toggle_button = page.locator(".sidebar-toggle").first
>     toggle_button.click()
> 
>     # after toggling sidebar, check that it is closed
>     expect(body).to_have_attribute("class", re.compile("close"))
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~~~python
import re
from playwright.sync_api import Page, expect

BASE_URL = "https://devops-bootcamp.liatr.io"

def test_bootcamp_link(page: Page):
    """Tests that the 'Introduction to DevOps' link navigates correctly."""
    # go to the bootcamp site
    page.goto(BASE_URL)

    # check we get expected page title
    expect(page).to_have_title(re.compile("Welcome"))

    # IMPLEMENT find the link to Introduction to DevOps section

    # IMPLEMENT check that we get the expected url

~~~

5. With just the starter code verify you can run the tests

6. Now we want to add another tests that verifies that the sidebar toggle works to toggle the visibility of the sidebar. Make sure you are writing good assertions to actually verify the behavior you are testing.

>? Playwright runs in headless mode by default. This is great for performance but can be challenging when developing. Explore the options `--headed` and `--slowmo`

**Challenge:** Modify your tests so that on any failure you capture a screenshot
```
Updates the fence to ~~~ b/c github suggestions uses ``` and things were messing up.

Good changes in general I just want this to be a little more hands on

While these are fairly trivial functional tests, they serve to show in general how they differ from unit tests.

## Exercise 2:

While [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) is becoming more popular due to its ease of use,[Selenium](https://www.selenium.dev/) is still in common use.

> 1. Install a Selenium WebDriver of your choice.(`brew install geckodriver` for firefox.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Install a Selenium WebDriver of your choice. (`brew install geckodriver` for firefox.)
```

> 2. Install the Selenium Python bindings.(`pip install selenium`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Install the Selenium Python bindings. (`pip install selenium`)
```
